Media re: Couples Podcast 

 

   I was delighted to be invited for a return  engagement by Dr. Joe Casciani, Host of the Living to 100 Club, one of the most popular podcasts addressing aging and older age.

   The title of the podcast was ”Still Together After All These Years: Counseling Older Couples”. In my work as a therapist,     I witnessed  many long-together couples struggling   with new   challenges, even as  many of these  frequently  occurred    in older age.    For example,  conflicts  emanating from  an  “empty nest,” when   they  were alone in the house without the presence, and distraction, of children. Or when they retired from work.  Are they doing this  around the same time?    Illness, especially illness that becomes chronic,   dramatically changes the     life  of   a couple.  Another challenge is  what I refer to as “differential   aging.” That is when  one   significantly  “ages faster” than their partner.    

  In the podcast  I discuss how being in a couple relationship  in old age can be wonderfully beneficial. A positive relationship serves to  support  and protect  the individual from having to go it alone. A useful metaphor is that  the journey of becoming an old  is like being in a somewhat  worn and leaky boat  traversing uncharted waters,  and it's helpful to have someone along for the journey to problem -solve and support and steady  the journey.  Sometimes long- festering issues crop up along the way, and therapy  can be helpful.

   The truth is that  most couples  don’t die at the same time. And the death  of a partner—no  matter  the  circumstances—is   a shock. One is left behind to  experience   an emotional  mixture of sadness, relief and grief. Grief is a normal reaction to  that  generally  lightens with  the passage of time.  Sometime, however,  grief is   excessively troubling, and therapy can be helpful.

   Over the years I have witnessed  greater  willingness of older adults  to seek   therapy, whether  it be   individual ,couple or family therapy.     The “new old”  have come to recognize  that  their stage of life can be very rich, and that development continues; that even relationship development  does not end with the accumulation of birthdays.  I've loved working with older couples.  

