POST. 37

 

The  Very Reasonable Notion of Reasonable Risk  

 

    In my  last  post (title) I wrote about the internalized script that guides the  ideas and colors the  images we hold about our current and future self.  This  script is unique to each of  us,   greatly informs our  experiences, roles and relationships,  especially our intimate ones. Over the life course we  embrace and enact multiple roles.  While the title of the role remains constant (for example son,mother,etc),  the expectations of    each role    change.    Nothing exemplifies this more   than the roles of parent and child and the resultant  “goodness of fit”  between generations .

   This  post is a  recounting of a case from my clinical practice years ago. A case is a story. A story has a plot line,and different people in the story play different roles. As a therapist we  identify the roles and the perceived role demands   for the individual in that role. We know from training and experience that conflicts, especially in close relationships,  often  develop where the role  performed  Is not a good fit with others’ roles and  impedes the individual’s  attempt to get their needs met.  Every role   has requirements that inform how we perform the role,    how we appraise our success   in executing it, and how   our  role performance  is perceived and assessed by others.   This  defines a frequent source of conflict  between  older persons and  their   middle-aged children.

  The Story

   I remember it well. It was an exquisite exemplar of  intergenerational   conflict  reflecting disparity in the working definition of a single term.

     A man called   my office to set an appointment  knowing  that I specialized in older age.  When we met, he   reported that  he was having a very hard time getting along  with his father. They  historically had a warm relationship but now  were on the verge of   not speaking to each other, and he hoped that meeting  with me would be helpful. He  told me  that his mother had passed away a little over a year ago ,and  now  his  eighty-seven-year-old father was  living alone in their house.    While his  father  appeared to be  managing quite well,   a snarly  issue evolved  that has led  to  the conflict between them. He  explained that   his  father’s house was perched on a significant hill and  every morning  since his father’s  retirement years ago he would   walk down the hill to a  mini  mart  at the bottom of the street  to buy  his daily newspaper.  He would then walk back up the hill to the house to have  his  second cup of coffee  while  reading the newspaper. This was his routine. However, the son reported that his father  has aged  considerably since his mother’s passing.    His balance is  not very good; his gait  had  slowed; looks   a little unsteady. His father no longer drives, and his son takes him to his appointments  and  has arranged for  his groceries  to be delivered to him every week. The son recently  purchased a subscription for the newspaper to be  delivered  every morning to his father’s front door. His father had thanked him for this.   However, recently when he stopped by the noticed   there were two papers for each day in his reading  area. When he asked his father about it   his father confessed that  he was still walking down the hill to the mini mart, buying the paper and walking back.

   And so, the battle began. The son calling his father  stubborn and being unaware of the risk he was taking. And  that it was  an unnecessary risk!      The father would not agree to  change his  behavior.    This went on to  where the son contacted  me.  Maybe, he thought, if he brought his father into my office, I could talk some sense into him.  I responded that often a meeting together with a professional could be helpful, and certainly worth a try.

The Meeting

    The  son and his father came  to the office the next week.   I asked the son  to wait  in  the waiting  area while I met   with his father alone  before  meeting with them together. The father was clearly primed  for  the meeting. He expressed    great unhappiness  with the rift that had developed with  his son, with whom he had always been very close . He acknowledged he knew well that he was dependent on  his son in a  number of ways,  and understood that  this dependency would likely increase over time.  “ I'm closer to ninety than eighty now”.  And  was quick to add “ but I get along pretty well.”

    When son and father were together at the meeting,  I  asked that each ,in turn, to state  their message;simply what they saw as  the  center of the problem that brought them here.

 

The Son’s Message  

    I am  his  son,  and  my father is an old man. My duty is  to take care of him, to keep him safe.   I love him and I want  to have him here for a long time, as long as I can. I know that it is not easy   for him  to get  around .   I  can see that, and  I want to make it easier for him, and safer.  I do not want him taking unreasonable  risks.  Walking down and up a hill for a newspaper, no matter what the weather,  when the newspaper is being delivered to his front steps, is  an unreasonable risk.

The Father’s Message  

  It feels   important for me to continue to do whatever I can  for as long as I can .I know my walking isn’t like a young man’s. Because I am not a young man.  It is important for me in order to do what I can feel like me; feel like myself.    I appreciate my son wanting to take care of me. I know he loves me. But I  need to live  whatever life I have left, feeling like me as best I can. And  it's not just the newspaper.  I’ve  known the man who  runs the store for many years.  He's an older person  too, like me,  and he knew my wife. So, with the newspaper I get a little conversation, and  it's  often the only conversation I have that day. So maybe I take a little risk. To me it's a reasonable risk. It’s   worth it to  have a conversation and  get a little exercise with the  walking and then read the newspaper. To feel like myself in the morning.   “A  little conversation and a paper. You don't get that with a paper that’s’ thrown on  your front step.”

 My Message

   I expressed appreciation to the son for his love and care of his father. And I  recognized that he is    very troubled by the recent rift between them. And that he wants very much to repair   this and return   their close and loving relationship.

 I expressed to the father that I recognize that he feels exactly the same way.

   The key issues are  around the terms “risk “and “reasonable.”

   I applauded their agreement regarding  the risk. They agree that  an older  person who is  a bit unsteady on his feet, walking up and  down, even a familiar one, was a risk, especially in  inclement weather.

  But  they differ in the  in what they consider as being reasonable .Our task is to identify what is “negotiable” and set a mutually acceptable contract. I asked if they agreed to this, and how long they thought it would take to get to ana mutually agreeable contract.

They \\The father agree that id f the wather was rainy,snowy,idy, or too cold he would not go out to but the newspaper insited that they set the “degrees’ for “too cold.  The son agreed to this, too.

I asked if they thought the contract was over. They said yes. But I said “I didn’t think so.”

The father mentioned some things that would help reinforce his acceptance of the contract .He enjoyed a conversation with someone around his own age. He wanted conversation in any form. He had lost his ability to drive, he had  lost the conversations  in the super market,and  most important he lost  wife. He  was clearly lonely for socialization.

So, I asked their permission to add   to the contract. The addition was for the  father  to get connected with the   Senior Center Program(s) in their city,enabling new opportunities for  learning,     new friends  with whom he might     even discuss the newspaper that he was reading in the morning. And  I suggested  that the son extend  his generosity  and  secure a car service to  transport  his father to and from  the Center .  (This was pre-Uber).

They both agreed to my  additions to the contract, smiled, stood to leave and hugged each other, . I smiled too and   told them they could contact me  any time if    needed.     But  I had confidence  that  they’d do fine.

What do you think?

 